503: concurrent consumer connections (#518)
IHE/DEV.SDPi: asciidoc/volume2/concurrent-connections/tf2-ch-a-mdpws-concurrent-connections.adoc

> [#vol2_ch_a_mdpws_concurrent_connections]

Reviewer: General questions:
Should a provider actively distribute connections between consumers? This at least would require some justification why this is preferable over just 'first come first serve'.

Should a provider signal limitations beforehand? So a consumer could use a adapted behaviour  from the beginning. The approach here is that the consumer gets an error and only then can retry in another way. Also this requires a rejection that can return a value, just no accepting a connection does not fit into this pattern,
Limits could be communicated with e.g. Discovery scopes. 

Limits can change over time (e.g. a provider uses a limited resource temporarily for non-SDC purposes), has this to be considered?

Author: It might be good to distribute connections. We discussed a couple of options for this during PAT-22: 
* QoS packets : individual packets in the http request can be tagged with a priority to facilitate routing. It doesn't seem to be a good option to me, but it is the one mentioned in §10.3.2 of 20701 so I suppose it has that going for it. 
* HTTP Priority headers from [RFC9218](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc9218/). This is a request based approach that makes a lot of sense to me. A consumer could put a higher priority on remote operations requests than renewing subscriptions, for example, which could allow the provider to make meaningful choices. 

Providers could also make choices based on the SOAP operation. For example, a connection that was just renewing subscriptions could be closed aggressively because the TLS handshake time (probably) isn't that critical for a renewal. Or we know the typical start-up behaviour is WS-transfer/get, Subscribe, GetMdib so a simple provider might detect that sequence and close when its done. These all leverage behaviours well defined in the HTTP standards though. 

We discussed signalling limitations, during PAT-22. In particular putting something in the ws-transfer/get response that could help the consumer plan its approach. E.g.:
<img width="1100" height="241" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/58533de7-24c2-4d77-a51f-a4b121217b43" />

I think the conclusion was that all consumers have to handle HTTP faults, like 429 anyway. So maybe http status codes are sufficient. Or at least a place to start with some suggested approaches as in this PR. 

I think you have a good use case in splitting connections for remote operations; it seems doable with just status codes but easier with a priori info. Perhaps that should be a separate issue? 

Limits can certainly be dynamic and depend on the providers load. I think this is part of the reason to try relying on HTTP status codes anyway. That is, even if a provider declares it can accept 3 concurrent connections from a single consumer it might not be able to do that with 5 consumers all at the same time. So we ultimately always have to handle the http status codes at some point.

Reviewer: Thought a bit more about all of this... 😀

Maybe the topic should be addressed first more fundamentally (before addressing capability and priority management, and mitigations). Participants have technical limitations themselves and may require certain capabilities from other participants. To have a connected system of medical devices the capabilities have to match.
This is probably most interesting for the customers that are building/integrating SDC systems.

From this perspective it would be interesting to:
- classify/describe capability limits 
- How to document them in IfU? (Participant should state their own overall limits and e.g. consumers should state what share of capabilities they need from each provider)
- Make limits/capabilities public in network (Metadata, new discovery scopes, ...)?
- Should devices with certain MDS type have minimal limits? Which would allow connection strategies for different device types, so that e.g. it's from consumers point of view safe to use one subscription for everything.
- Should consumers of devices with certain MDS type not suppose capabilities above certain limits?

I would guess that consumers generally will be hesitant to change there connection behaviour based on errors/status got from some functionality invocation (because they do what they do because they deem this necessary e.g. for risk reason). On the other hand I think this could be possible based on device type, remote controlling a SpO2 sensor has other risks and technical requirements than a ventilator. The device type is also already known from Discovery.

Author: Thanks @alex-pe1; it's great to have another perspective on this!

I guess the first point is these things would be out of scope for this PR which probably needs to focus on what to do about concurrent connections that the provider can't satisfy. Which might still occur if the consumer ignores any additional information provided. 

But the second point is I agree. Two capability use cases come to mind:
1. A consumer needs to know if it should send all requests over a single TCP connection or may open 2 or many connections to address risks from sending all communications over a single channel. The exact risks are a little vague to me. The only one I can think of is completing remote operations over a second channel, but I'm sure there are more. 
2. How will a provider ensure that delivering history reports doesn't delay other reports such as operation invoked responses. 

@d-gregorczyk  will probably argue this needs to be use case driven though & I don't have a lot of experience on the consumer side. 

Do you have other use cases for your consumer when you are relying on features that aren't promised by the SDC standards? I guess its hard to know until we hit issues like this?

How would you characterize the requirements around concurrent connections,  what information do you need to select a strategy, and what are the consequences of different strategies? For example, would you still:
* accept metrics from a device that can only do one concurrent connection,
* set patient/ location contexts,
* invoke a remote operation to set a metric and/ or operating mode,
* invoke remote operations that require watchdog messages (e.g., keep the drill going).
* participate in a distributed alarm system,

The last one is interesting because a provider might inspect the consumers client certificate and allow multiple concurrent connections for DAS participants/ operations. Which might influence the information you need to select a connection strategy. 

This might be something that could go into the external control pkp if the risks are mainly around remote operations.

Finally, I think connectivity information probably belongs in the ws-transfer/get response because it would more easily support extensions and nuance than including in discovery. Or is the ws-transfer/get too late?

Author: Some other "limitations" that consumers might need to know about: 
* maximum number of `pm:Validator`, `pm:Identification` instances a provider will store (typically somewhat less than ∞ allowed by 11073).
* maximum length of various `pm:LocationDetail` and `pm:PatientDemographicsCoreData` fields; last discussion left this to the provider's discretion, which might be fine. 
* maximum number of `ProposedContextStates` that can be included in a `SetContextState` operation. 
* maximum number of context states that a provider will store.

Reviewer: There are potentially unlimited containers everywhere in the MDIB. But at least the whole MDIB should fit into 4MB.

Author: True. But providers have control over the size of most of them. It is the user supplied data that I worry about. Some enterprising consumer that wants to put a photo of the patient in a patient context extension. 

The current thinking seems to be that providers can choose what they want to store, so that's okay for providers. But I was wondering more whether consumers need to know this?

> ==== MDPWS Concurrent Consumer Connections

Reviewer: Should be more clear that this is about TCP connections so that it will not be confused with e.g. HTTP connections or 'SDC connections'.

Also this could be general about limits of SDC providers or SDC participants. So TCP connections could be part of a broader concept 'capability limits'.

Author: Updated the title to `MDPWS Concurrent Consumer TCP Connections` to make it clearer this applies to the data transmission protocol; the narrative expands on this. 

@d-gregorczyk mentioned PAT-22 that this was an issue specifically with MDPWS. Other limits aren't MDPWS specific so probably go in other places such as the `pm:ProductionSpecification` for alert-pkp, an extension on the `pm:ClockDescriptor` for epoch support, certificate EKUs for access control things. 

Did you have some particular capabilities in mind?

> SDC allows a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to open multiple, concurrent TCP 

Reviewer: #
```suggestion
SDC may require/allow a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to open multiple, concurrent TCP 
```
depending on e.g. design of the Hosted Services or workflow

Author: I don't think there's any question that SDC allows a consumer to open multiple, concurrent connections because there is no requirement to prohibit this. Only providers must use a single connection. A later section already covers the several good reasons why the consumer would want to do this.

connections to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s hosted services.
While this offers flexibility for implementations, <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>

> may constrain the number of concurrent TCP connections to help mitigate risks to the availability of its 

Reviewer: One could argue that this is an overly specific way of constraining things...
On the other hand every participant has a limit of this kind.
Just to mention it - there can be limits in performing TLS handshakes or costly operations (how many per time interval), or number of subscriptions accepted, or bandwidth.

Author: Added a brief comment on reasons there could be practical limits. Also this is covered in more detail in the Motivations section.

<<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

This section describes scenarios and recommendations for managing concurrent connections
between consumers and providers.

.R0201
[sdpi_requirement#r0201,sdpi_req_level=may]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====
The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may limit the number of 
concurrent TCP connections from an individual <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to its hosted services.
====

[NOTE]
====

> * A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may choose to limit the number of concurrent connections 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may choose to limit the number of concurrent connections 
```

accepted from an individual <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to one or more, or 
allow unlimited connections, based on its resource capabilities and design goals.
* To enforce TCP connection limits, a provider may identify a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> by its:
** <<term_transport_address>> and/or,
** `[source endpoint]` message property (see <<ref_oasis_ws_addressing_2006>>) and/or,
** client credentials used for TLS authentication.

> * Securing the connection may be the most expensive part of an SDC service operation, so a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may 

Reviewer: It might be unreliable to identify single consumers using this methods.

Author: Yes. And annoying too since we run multiple instances of a test consumer on one computer for load testing. 

Is there a better way?

Author: See #525 for future work to identify consumers.

drop concurrent connections from a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> that exceed its limits, or respond with 

> HTTP status code `429 (Too Many Requests)` (after securing the connection) to signal the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> 

Reviewer: Returning a HTTP status code requires a successful TLS handshake, if this itself is costly for a certain provider this might not be a suiting way then.

Also this gives 429 a special semantics (so a provider can not use it 'normally' in it's HTTP server component). So it should be considered using a custom code or a soap fault.

Author: Yes, returning the status code may be too costly but at least it gives the consumer something it can work with. I don't think we can specify a blanket approach here. A busy provider might drop connects without any response (this happens anyway on the accept socket when the backlog is full), a less busy one might complete the handshake and provide an http response. I think a robust consumer would handle these faults in a way that might be application dependent (e.g., retry, user intervention, etc). 

Hmm. The semantics here seem consistent with the too many requests status code to me. This chapter is really just describing some scenarios where the consumer might see a too many request response and suggestions on how to deal with it. 

There seems advantages using standard codes if possible: the normal response to a "too many requests" seems to fit what's outlined. 

Do you have some scenarios where the consumer would respond differently to a fault that generates too many requests?

to reduce its connection count and/or frequency.
====

// todo: specify how client credentials can identify consumer based on the work from the 
// security working group: https://github.com/ornet-ev/wg-certificates 

****

.R0202
[sdpi_requirement#r0202,sdpi_req_level=shall]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====
The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> shall consider 
the risks of opening multiple, concurrent connections to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s 
hosted services, including the potential impact on both the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s 
and the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>>'s ability to deliver their respective 

> <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

Reviewer: Generally the behavior of the consumer should not have impact on the providers functionality, only the consumer may experience that it cannot do what it want to do on the provider.
I think this is too general.

Author: Any suggestions how we could fix this? I see it 
* partly addressing TR1134 from 10700: "CLINICAL FUNCTIONs of an SDC BASE PARTICIPANT except for network-related functionality SHALL be designed in a way that they are not impaired by the IT NETWORK communication, including but not limited to..."
* to draw attention to the issue from the consumer's side. The note offers one solution.

====

[NOTE]
====
A consumer may choose to limit the number and/or frequency of concurrent connections it 
opens to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s hosted services when it receives a

> response with HTTP status code `429` (Too Many Requests). 

Reviewer: again, that looks like '429' gets very special semantic here.

Author: I'm unclear on that. It seems the normal response to a `429` code would be to make fewer requests or wait a bit and try again (particularly when the `retry-after` header is present).

Author: The http standard does have a little bit to say on concurrency: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9112.html#name-concurrency. Its pretty vague though.

Author: And seems to me to fit the official description for the 429 status code:
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6585#autoid-4

Reviewer: I agree that it fits into the 429 description, but how to come from the general description to this recommendation here. I think the normal thing a client in the real world would do is wait some time and then trying the same thing again. (and this measure is not recommended here, so is this unrecommended? 🙂).

Author: Well, this is really intended as recommendations and guidance, not requirements. Consumers are free to keep trying over and over again but that might not get them anywhere if they didn't follow the suggestions. 

Not sure that's helped with a custom status code either. Presumably still a 4xx grouping and a consumer that hadn't read the recommendations can't do much more with an unknown client response than try again achieving the same outcome as the 429 code with more work and less interoperability.  :(

* separate time-critical operations (e.g., `SET SERVICE` operations) from less critical operations (e.g., subscription 
renewals), 
* reduce the risk of urgent messages being delayed by less urgent traffic, or
* provide redundancy for critical operations.

===== Interoperability Strategy

====== Status Signalling

A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> experiencing excessive load:

* may respond with HTTP status code `429` (Too Many Requests, <<ref_rfc_6585,RFC 6585, section 4>>), and 
* may include a `Retry-After` header (<<ref_rfc_7231,RFC 7231, section 7.3.1>>) to indicate when the consumer may retry the request.

Consumers should interpret this response as a signal to adapt their connection strategy. For example, a consumer may:

* reduce the number of concurrent connections,
* use a single connection for all operations,
* implement backoff and retry logic.

A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> receiving a `429` response should not interpret this as a operation failure, but rather as an indication that the provider is under load and needs the consumer to adjust its behaviour. 

> The consumer may use information in the `Retry-After` header, if present, to determine when to retry the request, but could also consider implementing an exponential backoff strategy to avoid overwhelming the provider with retries. 

Reviewer: This measures may not resolve the situation.... So how helpful is this approach within a system of connected medical devices? Maybe this requires Hospital IT to reconfigure something.

Author: Yep. Failure is always an option. 

I think the main utility is to bring to light that providers might not support concurrent connections from a single consumer and offer some ideas on how consumers could deal with this. The alternative could be mandating at least X, or no more than 1, connections from any consumer. But it seems there would be more challenges with that approach (even ignoring resource constraints). And I'm not sure it makes sense to pull all participants down the lowest common denominator since there are good reasons for consumers to use multiple connections in many cases.

[#vol2_ch_a_mdpws_concurrent_connections]
==== MDPWS Concurrent Consumer Connections

SDC allows a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to open multiple, concurrent TCP 
connections to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s hosted services.
While this offers flexibility for implementations, <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>

> may constrain the number of concurrent TCP connections to ensure availability of its 

Author: Increase/improve doesn't really sound right to me either because it implies availability is an aspirational goal that isn't being reached. Was there a specific reason you were keen on "increase" or "improve"? How about "&hellip; to help mitigate risks to availability of its system function contribution"?

> may constrain the number of concurrent TCP connections to ensure availability of its 

Reviewer 2: _Ensure_ is bad wording here as availability cannot be ensured by just restricting the number of concurrent connections, esp. when dealing with best effort networks. I am in favor of the rephrasing you provided here.

<<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

This section describes scenarios and recommendations for managing concurrent connections
between consumers and providers.

.R0201
[sdpi_requirement#r0201,sdpi_req_level=may]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====
The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may limit the number of 

> concurrent TCP connections from an individual <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to its hosted services to ensure availability and 

Reviewer 2: This should be removed: "to ensure availability and responsiveness of its <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>." Either we move that to the requirement notes or we can just delete it. The same statement is given in the introduction of this clause.

responsiveness of its <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.
====

[NOTE]
====
* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may choose to limit the number of concurrent connections 
accepted from an individual <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to one or more, or 
allow unlimited connections, based on its resource capabilities and design goals.
* To enforce TCP connection limits, a provider may identify a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> by its:
** <<term_transport_address>> and/or,
** `[source endpoint]` message property (see <<ref_oasis_ws_addressing_2006>>) and/or,
** client credentials used for TLS authentication.

> * Securing the connection may be the most expensive part of an operation, so a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may 

Author: Hmm. A soap request/response for mdpws. Annex B in 20701 uses the term "operations". Maybe "SDC service operation" is clearer?

> * Securing the connection may be the most expensive part of an operation, so a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may 

Reviewer 2: I was wondering if it pertains to just an SCO invocation or the Web Service request-response operation. SDC service operation should be clear enough.

On another matter, is securing the connection so expensive if a shared secret has been exchanged already? The expensive part should only be the initial handshake, shouldn't it?

> * Securing the connection may be the most expensive part of an operation, so a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may 

Author: Securing the connection is definitely less expensive when using TLSv1.3 session resumption. A full handshake might take 1400 ms while a resumed one about 1/2 that. Though actual benefit appears to depend on which certificate algorithms are used (RSA vs ECC) and hardware is used and how many active connections there have been (although TLS 1.3 doesn't require the server to cache information for the resumption SDC needs us to cache the certificate details in case the next request is a remote operation and we need the certificate information for the operation source).

And of course, clients are not required to use session resumption. 

Ultimately I don't think it will be negligible on low-resource devices for a while so we plan for delays.

> * Securing the connection may be the most expensive part of an operation, so a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may 

Author: Its worth noting here that the provider could also leave the secured connection open for multiple, sequential requests using the normal HTTP protocol. Then there is no additional overhead for each request. Currently we close after just a few requests, for testing, and when there have been no new requests for a "long" time. 

I guess the point is that if the connection isn't being used it can be closed and used by a different consumer, if the consumer is using it then it is best to keep it open. In other words, better a secured, productive connection in the hand than speculate there's one in the bush.

drop concurrent connections from a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> that exceed its limits, or respond with 
HTTP status code `429 (Too Many Requests)` (after securing the connection) to signal the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> 
to reduce its connection count and/or frequency.
====

> // todo: specify how client credentials can identify consumer based on the work from the 

Author: done.

// security working group: https://github.com/ornet-ev/wg-certificates 

****

.R0202
[sdpi_requirement#r0202,sdpi_req_level=shall]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====
The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> shall consider 
the risks of opening multiple, concurrent connections to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s 
hosted services, including the potential impact on both the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s 
and the <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>>'s ability to deliver their respective 

> <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

Reviewer: It's not clear to me what a consumer manufacturer really should/shall do here. Also I still think that the provider ensures that multiple connections from a consumer don't impose any **risk** on the provider.

Maybe the other way around it's better? 
A SOMDS Participant shall ensure that multiple, concurrent connections to or from another SOMDS Participant do not have negative impact on their ability to deliver their own current system function contribution.

Note: This defines no restrictions to the participant ability to reject any connection attempt.

(this may be already implicitly covered in B-PKP '5.2 Intended interoperability' giving also the system owner some responsibility)

Author: Yes, I think this builds on the material in 10700, §5.2. From there I think participants would just have to declare in the documentation that 1 connection was allowed or 2 connections were used. This may create a high burden on the system owner to identify interoperability issues that might undermine SDC adoption but be resolvable by participants. 

Hmm. Can we say "negative impacts" in requirements? I had a go at reframing around risks:

````
.R0202
[sdpi_requirement#r0202,sdpi_req_level=shall]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====

The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> shall 
consider the risks of opening multiple, concurrent connections 
to or from another <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> on the 
<<term_manufacturer>>'s <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>>'s 
ability to deliver their <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

====

[NOTE]
====
* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may create concurrent connections 
when it invokes operations on one or more of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s
services at the same time. 

* This requirement does not replace any limitation imposed by other requirements, which
may limit the number of concurrent connections made by a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>>
such as RefRequirement:R1001[]. 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> may limit the number concurrent connections
and/or frequency of connections when it receives a response with HTTP status code 
`429` (Too Many Requests). 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may limit the number of
active subscriptions or close connections with infrequent notifications. 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> may reject any inbound
connection attempt. When, for example, its backlog of pending connection
attempts exceeds available capacity for new connections.

====
````

Reviewer: I see B-BKP sometime has sometimes 'safe use', maybe here: '(safe) establishment of system functions... We are here only in process of trying to establish a connection or (part) of a SDC system.

Author: Yes; I think that wasn't clear. I made it clearer…

````
.R0202
[sdpi_requirement#r0202,sdpi_req_level=shall]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====

The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> 
shall consider the risk that another <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> 
could reject (additional) concurrent connections when assessing the ability of the 
<<term_manufacturer>>'s <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> to deliver 
its <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

====

[NOTE]
====
* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may create concurrent connections 
when it invokes operations on one or more of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s
services at the same time. 

* A concurrent connection means 2 or more active client connections create by the
<<term_manufacturer>>'s <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> to one other
<<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>>. This requirement does not apply to 
connections to different <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>>s.

* This requirement does not replace any limitation imposed by other requirements, which
may limit the number of concurrent connections made by a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>>
such as RefRequirement:R1001[]. 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> may limit the number concurrent connections
and/or frequency of connections when it receives a response with HTTP status code 
`429` (Too Many Requests). 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may limit the number of
active subscriptions or close connections with infrequent notifications. 

* A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_participant>> may reject, with or without any 
response, any inbound connection attempt. For example, when its backlog of pending 
connection attempts exceeds available capacity for new connections.

====

****
````

When a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> includes the `Retry-After` header (<<ref_rfc_7231,RFC 7231, section 7.3.1>>) in a `429 (Too Many Requests)` response, it should provide the retry period in seconds. RFC 7231 allows for an
HTTP-date format in the `Retry-After` header, but this is not recommended for SDC to avoid the complexity of parsing 
HTTP-date values and potential clock synchronization issues between devices.

====== Recommendations

[cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| Scenario | Provider Behaviour | Consumer Behaviour

| Resource-constrained provider
| Respond with `429`, with no `Retry-After` header, to requests from consumers exceeding connection limits
| Reduce concurrent connections; multiplex operations on single connection

| Normal provider (no constraints)
| Accept multiple connections per consumer
| May use multiple connections for priority separation if desired

| Provider under load (temporary)
| Respond with `429` to new connection attempts and include a `Retry-After` header
| Implement exponential backoff; retry after the specified time

|===

===== Related Requirements

> * RefRequirement:r1001[]: Single connection to consumer for sending reports

Reviewer 2: I think, upper-/lowercase should matter, but in the text above it is written as `RefRequirement:R1001[]`. I file a ticket to cover this separately.

> * RefRequirement:r1001[]: Single connection to consumer for sending reports

Author: Both are used in the broader text; `R1234` in titles and `r1234` in anchors but lacking the wisdom to pick a case I will leave this discourse and determination to the ticket.

[#vol2_ch_a_mdpws_concurrent_connections]
==== MDPWS Concurrent Consumer TCP Connections

SDC allows a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to open multiple, concurrent TCP 
connections to a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s hosted services.

> While this offers flexibility for implementations, <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this offers flexibility for implementations, a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>
```

may constrain the number of concurrent TCP connections to help mitigate risks to the availability of its 
<<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.
For example, securing connections may be expensive or network bandwidth may be limited. 

This section describes scenarios and recommendations for managing concurrent connections
between consumers and providers.

.R0201
[sdpi_requirement#r0201,sdpi_req_level=may]
[sdpi_req_type=risk_mitigation,sdpi_ses_type=effectiveness,sdpi_ses_test=wire]
****
[NORMATIVE]
====

> The <<term_manufacturer>> of a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may limit the number of 

Reviewer 2: I do not see why this is a requirement. Essential performance requirements are specified in Clause 5.3. of BPKP by RR1094, RR1655, R1250, RR1105, RR1106, and RRR1098. sdpi:R0201 is rather a supporting measure that the manufacturer can implement to verify the device's performance when it is integrated into a system as laid out in Clause 5.3 of BPKP. In my view, this does not require a specific requirement; plain text is absolutely sufficient.

Author: It is a good question… 🤔. After refining R0202  with @alex-pe1 's help, that one alone is enough to fill the interoperability gap left by 10700. Now merged 201 into narrative.

concurrent TCP connections from an individual <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> to its hosted services.
====

[NOTE]
====

> * A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> may choose to limit the number of concurrent connections 

Reviewer 2: The note appears to be another "may" requirement. The requirments says, the manufacturer limits the number of concurrent connections, the note says, the provider limits the number of connections.

I think, the note provides helpful information that can be presented as regular accompanying text herein. The requirement text can be removed or should at least be harmonized with the first sentence of this note.

<<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>>'s hosted services may consume a disproportionate number of 
available connections, reducing the number of <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>>s that a 
<<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> can support and/or compromising its <<acronym_sfc,system function contribution>>.

====== Consumer Rationale for Multiple Connections

A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> may open multiple concurrent connections to a provider's hosted services to:

* separate time-critical operations (e.g., `SET SERVICE` operations) from less critical operations (e.g., subscription 
renewals), 
* reduce the risk of urgent messages being delayed by less urgent traffic, or
* provide redundancy for critical operations.

===== Interoperability Strategy

====== Status Signalling

A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> experiencing excessive load:

* may respond with HTTP status code `429` (Too Many Requests, <<ref_rfc_6585,RFC 6585, section 4>>), and 
* may include a `Retry-After` header (<<ref_rfc_7231,RFC 7231, section 7.3.1>>) to indicate when the consumer may retry the request.

> Consumers should interpret this response as a signal to adapt their connection strategy. For example, a consumer may:

Reviewer 2: This sentence should be rephrased such that the "should" disappears.

```suggestion
Consumers can interpret this response as a signal to adapt their connection strategy. For example, a consumer may:
```

* reduce the number of concurrent connections,
* use a single connection for all operations,
* implement backoff and retry logic.

> A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>> receiving a `429` response should not interpret this as a operation failure, but rather as an indication that the provider is under load and needs the consumer to adjust its behaviour. 

Reviewer 2: To be replaced by something that does not pose requirement elements (`should not`).

```suggestion
For a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_consumer>>, a `429` response is not an operation failure, but an indication that the provider is under load and needs the consumer to adjust its behaviour.
```

The consumer may use information in the `Retry-After` header, if present, to determine when to retry the request, but could also consider implementing an exponential backoff strategy to avoid overwhelming the provider with retries. 

> When a <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> includes the `Retry-After` header (<<ref_rfc_7231,RFC 7231, section 7.3.1>>) in a `429 (Too Many Requests)` response, it should provide the retry period in seconds. RFC 7231 allows for an

Reviewer 2: Again, a `should` requirement identifier, that is best to be replaced with something along the lines:

```suggestion
A <<vol1_spec_sdpi_p_actor_somds_provider>> that includes the `Retry-After` header (<<ref_rfc_7231,RFC 7231, section 7.3.1>>) in a `429 (Too Many Requests)` response expresses the retry period in seconds. RFC 7231 allows for an
```
